.TH LOGCUT 8 "June 2026" "logcut 1.0.41" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
logcut \- emergency log compaction and rotation without restarting the application
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B logcut
.RI [ options ]
.I source-log
.I rotated-output
.PP
.B logcut
.B -g
.RB [ -k
.IR size ]
.RB [ -p
.IR percent ]
.RB [ -v ]
.I source-log
.I rotated-output.gz
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B logcut
is an emergency log compaction tool for Linux systems where a single active log
file has consumed most of the disk and the application cannot be restarted or
asked to reopen its log file.
.PP
The tool reads old data from the active source log, writes that data into a
rotated output file, and then frees the matching old byte range from the source
file using Linux hole punching through Go syscalls.
.PP
In gzip mode, each processed chunk is compressed and appended directly into one
final gzip archive. No temporary part files and no separate merge step are
required.
.PP
The source log path is not renamed, removed, or replaced. The application can
continue writing to the same file descriptor.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -g
Enable gzip output. This is the recommended mode for low-disk emergencies.
Chunks are appended directly into one final gzip archive.
.TP
.BI -k " size"
Keep the latest part of the active source log untouched. Examples: 10G, 512M,
1G. If this option is not provided, logcut keeps the latest 10 percent of the
source log size.
.TP
.BI -p " percent"
Use only this percentage of currently free disk space as the working budget for
the next chunk. The default is 20. The remaining free space is treated as a
protected buffer for application writes and sudden spikes.
.TP
.B -v
Enable verbose output. This prints detailed per-step and per-chunk logs,
including read, archive, punch-hole, chunk duration, compression ratio, free
space before and after, recovered estimate, and next chunk size.
.TP
.B --preflight
Run safety checks only and do not modify the source log.
.TP
.BI --stop-free-above " size"
Stop safely after the current chunk once free space is above the requested size.
.TP
.BI --max-runtime " duration"
Stop safely after the current chunk once runtime reaches the requested duration.
.TP
.BI --rate-limit " size"
Approximate raw processing rate limit per second, such as 100M.
.TP
.BI --sleep-between-chunks " duration"
Pause after each completed safe chunk, such as 500ms or 2s.
.TP
.BI --log-file " path"
Also write run output to a log file for incident audit records.
.TP
.B --json
Emit JSON events for automation instead of normal human progress logs.
.TP
.BI --compress-level " level"
Set gzip compression level. Use 1 for fastest, 9 for best compression, or -1
for the Go gzip default.
.TP
.BI --verify " mode"
Set gzip verification mode. Supported values are full and none.
.TP
.BI --state-dir " dir"
Override the state directory.
.TP
.BI --lock-dir " dir"
Override the lock directory.
.TP
.BI --progress-interval " duration"
Set the progress summary interval. Examples: 5s, 30s, 1m. The default is 5s.
.TP
.B --quiet
Suppress progress and verbose output.
.TP
.B --dry-run
Print the compaction plan without modifying files.
.TP
.B --force
Allow risky plain output on low disk. Plain output is not recommended during
emergencies because it does not compress rotated data.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Preflight:
.B sudo logcut --preflight -g -k 10G /var/log/app/debug.log /var/log/app/debug.log.rotated.gz
.TP
Production emergency mode:
.B sudo logcut -v --log-file /var/log/logcut-run.log --stop-free-above 20G --max-runtime 30m --rate-limit 100M --sleep-between-chunks 500ms --compress-level 1 -g -k 10G /var/log/app/debug.log /var/log/app/debug.log.rotated.gz
.TP
Small RAM machine mode:
.B sudo logcut -v --log-file /var/log/logcut-run.log --stop-free-above 20G --max-runtime 30m --rate-limit 25M --sleep-between-chunks 2s --compress-level 1 --verify none -p 5 -g -k 10G /var/log/app/debug.log /var/log/app/debug.log.rotated.gz
.TP
JSON automation mode:
.B sudo logcut --json -g -k 10G /var/log/app/debug.log /var/log/app/debug.log.rotated.gz
.SH OUTPUT
By default, logcut prints the operation plan and periodic progress summaries.
Progress includes percentage complete, processed bytes, remaining bytes, speed,
elapsed time, and estimated time remaining.
.PP
With
.B -v,
logcut also prints detailed chunk logs for read, archive, punch-hole, and final
chunk status.
.SH GRACEFUL STOP
If logcut receives SIGINT or SIGTERM, it records the stop request and exits at a
safe chunk boundary. It does not intentionally stop halfway through the archive,
sync, state-save, or punch-hole sequence. The saved state allows a later run to
resume.
.SH HOW IT WORKS
For each chunk, logcut performs the following sequence:
.IP 1. 4
Read old data from the active source log.
.IP 2. 4
Stop on a newline boundary where possible.
.IP 3. 4
Write the chunk to the rotated output. In gzip mode, the chunk is compressed
using Go gzip APIs.
.IP 4. 4
Sync the output file.
.IP 5. 4
Update state under /var/lib/logcut.
.IP 6. 4
Punch a hole in the same byte range of the original source log.
.IP 7. 4
Recalculate free space and choose the next safe chunk size.
.PP
The tool must never punch a source range before the matching output data has
been written and synced.
.SH DISK SAFETY
By default, logcut uses only 20 percent of currently free disk space as the
working budget for the next chunk. This protects the remaining free space for
application log growth, system logs, metadata updates, and sudden write spikes.
.PP
The chunk size is recalculated during the run. If free space improves, chunks
may become larger. If free space drops, chunks become smaller or the tool stops
safely.
.SH SPARSE FILE BEHAVIOR
After compaction, the source log becomes sparse. The apparent size shown by
.BR ls (1)
may still look large, while the real disk usage shown by
.BR du (1)
should be reduced.
.PP
Historical data should be read from the rotated output file, not from the old
beginning of the sparse active source log.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/logcut
State files used for resume safety.
.TP
.I /var/lock
Lock files used to prevent multiple logcut processes from operating on the same
source and output pair.
.TP
.I /usr/share/doc/logcut
Package documentation.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
Linux with filesystem support for hole punching. Common filesystems such as XFS
and ext4 usually support this when mounted normally.
.PP
Root or sufficient permissions are normally required to read/write application
logs and punch holes.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Runtime error, unsafe condition, or operation failure.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid command-line usage.
.SH NOTES
The runtime program uses Go APIs and Go syscalls directly. It does not shell out
to external commands such as fallocate, cp, mv, split, or gzip for the log
compaction operation.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR du (1),
.BR ls (1),
.BR gzip (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Rushikesh Sakharle
.SH LICENSE
MIT License.
